Title: A Brief History of CNNs in Image Segmentation: From R-CNN to Mask R-CNN
Author: Dhruv Parthasarathy
----------------------------------------

At Athelas, we use Convolutional Neural Networks(CNNs) for a lot more than just classification! In this post, we’ll see how CNNs can be used, with great results, in image instance segmentation.
Ever since Alex Krizhevsky, Geoff Hinton, and Ilya Sutskever won ImageNet in 2012, Convolutional Neural Networks(CNNs) have become the gold standard for image classification. In fact, since then, CNNs have improved to the point where they now outperform humans on the ImageNet challenge!
While these results are impressive, image classification is far simpler than the complexity and diversity of true human visual understanding.
In classification, there’s generally an image with a single object as the focus and the task is to say what that image is (see above). But when we look at the world around us, we carry out far more complex tasks.
We see complicated sights with multiple overlapping objects, and different backgrounds and we not only classify these different objects but also identify their boundaries, differences, and relations to one another!
Can CNNs help us with such complex tasks? Namely, given a more complicated image, can we use CNNs to identify the different objects in the image, and their boundaries? As has been shown by Ross Girshick and his peers over the last few years, the answer is conclusively yes.
Through this post, we’ll cover the intuition behind some of the main techniques used in object detection and segmentation and see how they’ve evolved from one implementation to the next. In particular, we’ll cover R-CNN (Regional CNN), the original application of CNNs to this problem, along with its descendants Fast R-CNN, and Faster R-CNN. Finally, we’ll cover Mask R-CNN, a paper released recently by Facebook Research that extends such object detection techniques to provide pixel level segmentation. Here are the papers referenced in this post:
Inspired by the research of Hinton’s lab at the University of Toronto, a small team at UC Berkeley, led by Professor Jitendra Malik, asked themselves what today seems like an inevitable question:
Object detection is the task of finding the different objects in an image and classifying them (as seen in the image above). The team, comprised of Ross Girshick (a name we’ll see again), Jeff Donahue, and Trevor Darrel found that this problem can be solved with Krizhevsky’s results by testing on the PASCAL VOC Challenge, a popular object detection challenge akin to ImageNet. They write,
Let’s now take a moment to understand how their architecture, Regions With CNNs (R-CNN) works.
Understanding R-CNN
The goal of R-CNN is to take in an image, and correctly identify where the main objects (via a bounding box) in the image.
But how do we find out where these bounding boxes are? R-CNN does what we might intuitively do as well - propose a bunch of boxes in the image and see if any of them actually correspond to an object.
R-CNN creates these bounding boxes, or region proposals, using a process called Selective Search which you can read about here. At a high level, Selective Search (shown in the image above) looks at the image through windows of different sizes, and for each size tries to group together adjacent pixels by texture, color, or intensity to identify objects.
Once the proposals are created, R-CNN warps the region to a standard square size and passes it through to a modified version of AlexNet (the winning submission to ImageNet 2012 that inspired R-CNN), as shown above.
On the final layer of the CNN, R-CNN adds a Support Vector Machine (SVM) that simply classifies whether this is an object, and if so what object. This is step 4 in the image above.
Improving the Bounding Boxes
Now, having found the object in the box, can we tighten the box to fit the true dimensions of the object? We can, and this is the final step of R-CNN. R-CNN runs a simple linear regression on the region proposal to generate tighter bounding box coordinates to get our final result. Here are the inputs and outputs of this regression model:
So, to summarize, R-CNN is just the following steps:
R-CNN works really well, but is really quite slow for a few simple reasons:
In 2015, Ross Girshick, the first author of R-CNN, solved both these problems, leading to the second algorithm in our short history - Fast R-CNN. Let’s now go over its main insights.
Fast R-CNN Insight 1: RoI (Region of Interest) Pooling
For the forward pass of the CNN, Girshick realized that for each image, a lot of proposed regions for the image invariably overlapped causing us to run the same CNN computation again and again (~2000 times!). His insight was simple — Why not run the CNN just once per image and then find a way to share that computation across the ~2000 proposals?
This is exactly what Fast R-CNN does using a technique known as RoIPool (Region of Interest Pooling). At its core, RoIPool shares the forward pass of a CNN for an image across its subregions. In the image above, notice how the CNN features for each region are obtained by selecting a corresponding region from the CNN’s feature map. Then, the features in each region are pooled (usually using max pooling). So all it takes us is one pass of the original image as opposed to ~2000!
Fast R-CNN Insight 2: Combine All Models into One Network
The second insight of Fast R-CNN is to jointly train the CNN, classifier, and bounding box regressor in a single model. Where earlier we had different models to extract image features (CNN), classify (SVM), and tighten bounding boxes (regressor), Fast R-CNN instead used a single network to compute all three.
You can see how this was done in the image above. Fast R-CNN replaced the SVM classifier with a softmax layer on top of the CNN to output a classification. It also added a linear regression layer parallel to the softmax layer to output bounding box coordinates. In this way, all the outputs needed came from one single network! Here are the inputs and outputs to this overall model:
Even with all these advancements, there was still one remaining bottleneck in the Fast R-CNN process — the region proposer. As we saw, the very first step to detecting the locations of objects is generating a bunch of potential bounding boxes or regions of interest to test. In Fast R-CNN, these proposals were created using Selective Search, a fairly slow process that was found to be the bottleneck of the overall process.
In the middle 2015, a team at Microsoft Research composed of Shaoqing Ren, Kaiming He, Ross Girshick, and Jian Sun, found a way to make the region proposal step almost cost free through an architecture they (creatively) named Faster R-CNN.
The insight of Faster R-CNN was that region proposals depended on features of the image that were already calculated with the forward pass of the CNN (first step of classification). So why not reuse those same CNN results for region proposals instead of running a separate selective search algorithm?
Indeed, this is just what the Faster R-CNN team achieved. In the image above, you can see how a single CNN is used to both carry out region proposals and classification. This way, only one CNN needs to be trained and we get region proposals almost for free! The authors write:
Here are the inputs and outputs of their model:
How the Regions are Generated
Let’s take a moment to see how Faster R-CNN generates these region proposals from CNN features. Faster R-CNN adds a Fully Convolutional Network on top of the features of the CNN creating what’s known as the Region Proposal Network.
The Region Proposal Network works by passing a sliding window over the CNN feature map and at each window, outputting k potential bounding boxes and scores for how good each of those boxes is expected to be. What do these k boxes represent?
Intuitively, we know that objects in an image should fit certain common aspect ratios and sizes. For instance, we know that we want some rectangular boxes that resemble the shapes of humans. Likewise, we know we won’t see many boxes that are very very thin. In such a way, we create k such common aspect ratios we call anchor boxes. For each such anchor box, we output one bounding box and score per position in the image.
With these anchor boxes in mind, let’s take a look at the inputs and outputs to this Region Proposal Network:
We then pass each such bounding box that is likely to be an object into Fast R-CNN to generate a classification and tightened bounding boxes.
So far, we’ve seen how we’ve been able to use CNN features in many interesting ways to effectively locate different objects in an image with bounding boxes.
Can we extend such techniques to go one step further and locate exact pixels of each object instead of just bounding boxes? This problem, known as image segmentation, is what Kaiming He and a team of researchers, including Girshick, explored at Facebook AI using an architecture known as Mask R-CNN.
Much like Fast R-CNN, and Faster R-CNN, Mask R-CNN’s underlying intuition is straight forward. Given that Faster R-CNN works so well for object detection, could we extend it to also carry out pixel level segmentation?
Mask R-CNN does this by adding a branch to Faster R-CNN that outputs a binary mask that says whether or not a given pixel is part of an object. The branch (in white in the above image), as before, is just a Fully Convolutional Network on top of a CNN based feature map. Here are its inputs and outputs:
But the Mask R-CNN authors had to make one small adjustment to make this pipeline work as expected.
RoiAlign - Realigning RoIPool to be More Accurate
When run without modifications on the original Faster R-CNN architecture, the Mask R-CNN authors realized that the regions of the feature map selected by RoIPool were slightly misaligned from the regions of the original image. Since image segmentation requires pixel level specificity, unlike bounding boxes, this naturally led to inaccuracies.
The authors were able to solve this problem by cleverly adjusting RoIPool to be more precisely aligned using a method known as RoIAlign.
Imagine we have an image of size 128x128 and a feature map of size 25x25. Let’s imagine we want features the region corresponding to the top-left 15x15 pixels in the original image (see above). How might we select these pixels from the feature map?
We know each pixel in the original image corresponds to ~ 25/128 pixels in the feature map. To select 15 pixels from the original image, we just select 15 * 25/128 ~= 2.93 pixels.
In RoIPool, we would round this down and select 2 pixels causing a slight misalignment. However, in RoIAlign, we avoid such rounding. Instead, we use bilinear interpolation to get a precise idea of what would be at pixel 2.93. This, at a high level, is what allows us to avoid the misalignments caused by RoIPool.
Once these masks are generated, Mask R-CNN combines them with the classifications and bounding boxes from Faster R-CNN to generate such wonderfully precise segmentations:
If you’re interested in trying out these algorithms yourselves, here are relevant repositories:
Faster R-CNN
Mask R-CNN
In just 3 years, we’ve seen how the research community has progressed from Krizhevsky et. al’s original result to R-CNN, and finally all the way to such powerful results as Mask R-CNN. Seen in isolation, results like Mask R-CNN seem like incredible leaps of genius that would be unapproachable. Yet, through this post, I hope you’ve seen how such advancements are really the sum of intuitive, incremental improvements through years of hard work and collaboration. Each of the ideas proposed by R-CNN, Fast R-CNN, Faster R-CNN, and finally Mask R-CNN were not necessarily quantum leaps, yet their sum products have led to really remarkable results that bring us closer to a human level understanding of sight.
What particularly excites me, is that the time between R-CNN and Mask R-CNN was just three years! With continued funding, focus, and support, how much further can Computer Vision improve over the next three years?
If you see any errors or issues in this post, please contact me at dhruv@getathelas.com and I”ll immediately correct them!
If you’re interested in applying such techniques, come join us at Athelas where we apply Computer Vision to blood diagnostics daily:
Other posts we’ve written:
Thanks to Bharath Ramsundar, Pranav Ramkrishnan, Tanay Tandon, and Oliver Cameron for help with this post!
From a quick cheer to a standing ovation, clap to show how much you enjoyed this story.
@dhruvp. VP Eng @Athelas. MIT Math and CS Undergrad ’13. MIT CS Masters ’14. Previously: Director of AI Programs @ Udacity.
Blood Diagnostics through Deep Learning http://athelas.com
