BIS Papers No 7 13
A new perspective to finance and competition and
challenges for financial institutions in the internet era
Lihui Lin, Xianjun Geng and Andrew Whinston1
1. Introduction
New information technology (IT), especially the internet, have revolutionised the finance industry with
the rapid growth of electronic finance. E-finance activities include all types of financial activities carried
out over the internet or other public networks, such as online banking, electronic trading, the provision
and delivery of various financial products and services (for instance insurance, mortgage and
brokerage), electronic money, electronic payment and communication of financial information.
E-finance is a driving force that is changing the landscape of the finance industry fundamentally, in
particular, towards a more competitive industry. E-finance has blurred the boundaries between
different financial institutions, enabled new financial products and services, and made existing financial
services available in different packages. But we think the influences of e-finance go far beyond this.
The developments in e-finance, together with other financial innovations, are constantly bringing new
challenges to finance theory and changing people’s understanding of the financial system.
In this paper we suggest a new perspective on financial intermediation and markets. We discuss why
and how this new framework of analysis may shed light on the understanding of finance in the age of
the internet and IT revolution as well as help explain the financial innovations seen in the past few
decades. We also examine competition issues and what strategies financial institutions should adopt.
2. A new perspective on financial intermediation
We propose a new perspective on financial intermediation in which both traditional intermediaries and
financial markets can be examined in a unified approach. The present theory of financial
intermediation based on the idea of the perfect market posits the role of intermediaries as one that
alleviates market imperfections. Meanwhile, research on market microstructure, which studies closely
how markets function and operate, illuminates the market mechanism. We think that the traditional
distinction between the intermediaries and markets hampers finance theory in explaining the fast and
constantly changing financial system.
Financial markets, like all other markets, are created and operated by people and therefore are
essentially firms. They are a special type of financial intermediary with higher transparency and
efficiency. On the other hand, traditional financial intermediaries, by matching savers and borrowers,
are also providing market-making services, though in a more opaque way.
Embracing both traditional intermediaries and markets in one framework, this new perspective enables
better understanding of the financial system and makes it possible to solve long-time puzzles in
finance theory. Instead of patching and modifying a theory that is constantly challenged by new
developments, this more integrated and consistent conceptual framework tends to explain well the
revolution that is taking place in the finance industry.

1
 Lin (lhlin@eco.utexas.edu) works in the Economics Department and Geng (gengxj@mail.utexas.edu) and Whinston
(abw@uts.cc.utexas.edu) in the Centre for Research in Electronic Commerce, all at the University of Texas at Austin.
14 BIS Papers No 7
2.1 Present financial intermediation theory and recent developments
The theory of financial intermediation is based on the classic notion of the perfect market that
originated with Adam Smith, was developed by Marshall and Walras and was formalised in the ArrowDebreu model of resource allocation. According to this theory, financial intermediation exists because
of market frictions and imperfections and acts as a remedy to the market system.
Researchers have studied the role of intermediation in alleviating different market frictions and
imperfections. One body of literature focuses on transaction cost (see, for example, Gurley and Shaw
(1960)), and another stresses the importance of asymmetric information between investors and
borrowers (see Leland and Pyle (1977), Campbell and Kracaw (1980), Diamond (1984), Gale and
Hellwig (1985), Boyd and Prescott (1986); for a comprehensive understanding, see Freixas and
Rochet (1997) and for a brief summary, see Allen and Santomero (1998)).
However, such a passive view on intermediation is obviously inadequate in explaining the reality of the
finance industry, especially the dramatic growth, accelerated developments and extensive innovations
in recent decades. Although the growth of financial markets and revolution in IT have reduced the
transaction costs and alleviated information asymmetries, intermediaries survive, and in fact grow in
overall size and importance to the economy. In response, some researchers seek to reconcile the
differences between theory and reality and to view intermediaries as value-adding institutions.
In a series of papers, Merton (1989, 1993, 1995) and Merton and Bodie (1993, 1995) propose a
functional perspective of financial intermediation in contrast to the institutional perspective. From their
perspective, the economic functions of financial intermediation are relatively stable and the institutional
structure evolves in performing those functions. Merton (1995) describes a model of the dynamics of
financial evolution in which intermediaries serve an important latent function of creating and testing
new products before they are “seasoned” enough to be traded in a market. The interactions between
financial intermediaries and markets reinforce and improve the performance of their functions and
push the “financial system toward an idealised target of full efficiency” (Merton (1995)).
In line with the functional perspective analysis, Allen and Santomero (1998) emphasise the role of
intermediation in risk trading and participation costs. They argue that while their role in reducing
market frictions decline, they play a crucial role in transferring and managing risk and in lowering
participation costs for individuals.
All these theories try to render some active roles played by financial intermediaries rather than a pure
remedy to market imperfections. However, these theories, just as the traditional intermediation theory,
have the perfect market as their benchmark. While financial intermediaries are studied closely and
carefully, the financial markets are still viewed in an abstract way as frictionless and dynamically
complete in the limit. Scholtens and van Wensveen (2000) suggest that financial intermediation theory
leave its paradigm of static perfect markets, and envisage that in a modern theory, financial institutions
should be viewed as independent market parties who create financial products and whose worth to
their clients is the transformation of risk, term, scale, location, and liquidity.
We think that to explore a new theory of financial intermediation, taking into account technology
developments, it is not enough to look at only traditional intermediaries. Intermediaries should be
viewed in the big picture of financial systems. In particular, we need to look at how financial markets
work, the study of which is called market microstructure, the topic we discuss in the following
subsection.
2.2 The market microstructure literature and other contributions to understanding
markets
While economics usually treats markets as ideal and abstract, there are studies that focus on how
markets are created and function, the most conspicuous being the market microstructure theory in
finance. This literature puts market mechanisms under the microscope and analyses specific
institutions of exchange and trading rules, especially their role in price formation; see O’Hara (1995).
In earlier models of the price discovery process, dealers (or market makers) act as providers of
liquidity and set prices in order to control inventory levels. Recent work in market microstructure
focuses more on the impact of information on market prices, linking advances in the economics of
information, rational expectations and imperfect competition. In these models, dealers change prices
in response to information considerations; Madhavan (2000).
BIS Papers No 7 15
This information-based game-theoretic paradigm was first introduced in Glosten and Milgrom (1985)
and Kyle (1985), and further developed by Easley and O’Hara (1987), Holden and Subrahmanyam
(1992) and many others.
In the Glosten and Milgrom (1985) model, there are two types of traders, informed and uninformed.
Ignoring inventory and order processing costs, a rational market maker will quote bid and ask prices
that are ex post regret-free. For example, the market maker’s bid price is the expected value of the
security given that a sell order has arrived. By setting the bid and ask spread, the market maker earns
zero expected profit by recouping profits from the uninformed traders to compensate for the loss to the
informed. Thus, the bid-ask spread may exist even if the market maker has no costs, behaves
competitively and is risk neutral.
In addition to price formation, informational research in microstructure also covers various topics such
as market structure and design, market transparency (the ability of market participants to observe
information about the trading process), and informational issues in microstructure related to other
areas including corporate finance, asset pricing, and international finance; Madhavan (2000).
We think that the informed-uninformed paradigm in market microstructure literature does not take into
account the role of information technology. Market microstructure research makes assumptions about
the information structure of market participants. We argue that information structure is driven by the
developments in IT and is decided based on technology and economic incentives. Dewan and
Mendelson (1998) study time-based competition in imperfect securities markets, where traders make
IT investments to gain faster access to information and thus earn higher trading profits.
As well as the market microstructure literature, there are other studies that have shed considerable
light on the market mechanism. Shiller (1993) pointed out that the market system is an invention, a
system created by social thinkers who designed it with a purpose. We think that markets are not only
social inventions but also inventions based on technology developments. As technologies keep
reducing transaction costs, new markets are invented.
Game theory provides powerful tools and techniques in analysing specific market mechanisms. In his
book on two-sided matching markets, Roth (1990) presents not only game theoretical models, but also
explains how the incentives that a market organisation gives to the participants impose constraints on
the outcomes that the market may achieve.
Finally, before we move on to the new perspective on intermediation, we would like to mention the
inspiring work by Spulber (1999). He develops a theory in which firms, acting as intermediaries, create
and run markets. It is path breaking in integrating both intermediation theory and microstructure
theory, and in applying and extending them to a new area. Notably, his theory of firms emphasises
that firms operate the market mechanism, most importantly by posting prices as well as providing
other related services such as monitoring. He is critical of most economic analysis for
overemphasising the idealised view of the market mechanism and downplaying the role of firms in
market-making activities.
2.3 The financial system analysed in terms of the new perspective
With the background of literature on both intermediaries and markets, we now introduce a new
perspective on financial intermediation, an integrated theory in which both traditional intermediaries
and financial markets can be analysed with a unified approach. In order to fully understand the role of
financial intermediation, it is necessary to break down the clear-cut distinction between financial
intermediaries and financial markets and to study the financial system in one analytical framework.
In essence, all financial institutions act as intermediaries between lenders and borrowers, either by
purchasing and reselling with or without transformation (such as a bank taking deposits and
transforming them into loans, or a stock specialist trading shares from her own account), or by
matching orders (such as an auction market).
First of all, financial institutions produce “matching” between market participants. Financial markets
produce matching for standardised products. Traditional intermediaries deal with more customised
products and services, thus more transformation is needed within the organisation before matching is
achieved. As an analogy to other industries, financial markets act like retailers while the traditional
intermediaries are more like manufactures and/or wholesalers.
16 BIS Papers No 7
This new perspective helps to understand the role of market making that financial institutions play. In
general, because the market mechanism has been considered exogenous to the analysis, the value
added by creating and operating markets has not been fully recognised. Thus the intermediation
theory finds itself in an awkward position when trying to define value-adding activities carried out by
intermediaries, while in market microstructure theory there is no theoretical foundation for profitable
market making activities. We think it is time to pay due attention to the value of market making. By
doing so, the value-adding functions performed by intermediaries become conspicuous.
Such a perspective is actually crucial in understanding the finance industry in the internet era. The
rapid developments in electronic finance have blurred the boundaries between commercial and
investment banks, brokerage firms and trading platforms, traditional intermediaries and market
intermediaries. Separate finance theories cannot explain this trend in the finance industry. With this
integrated analytical framework, however, we see that the advances in technology have changed the
production function in all financial institutions and these firms are differentiating their products and
services as well as vertically integrating with each other.
This new perspective also enables analyses of financial markets that were not possible under the
idealised view about them. One of the open questions in the market microstructure literature is the
“network externality puzzle”, referring to the fact that despite strong arguments for consolidation, many
markets are fragmented; Madhavan (2000). From the new perspective, however, financial markets are
operated as businesses and they compete with each other. Instead of discussing market
fragmentation and social welfare, we now study how markets compete and what is the best achievable
result. Instead of asking whether market consolidation is beneficial, we now study the empirical issue
of whether there will be entry in the “market” for financial markets and what the equilibrium number of
markets will be, in other words, we ask whether one global market will emerge.
It may also shed light on the issue of liquidity. Both intermediation theory and microstructure theory
study liquidity but in isolated approaches. Diamond and Dybvig (1983) develop a three-period model
where banks can provide liquidity to customers with idiosyncratic inter-temporal preferences. In their
model, banks are “coalitions of depositors” and have no financial resources other than deposits. In
microstructure theory, it is well known that dealers provide liquidity to the markets by standing ready to
trade from their own accounts with investors. In light of the latter, we think that banks can also provide
liquidity with their own equity.
We emphasise that in this unified theory of financial intermediation, the role of information is still
crucial and the role of IT should be fully recognised. Information is crucial in the production process of
financial services and IT investment is one of most important strategic decisions for all financial
institutions. Financial institutions produce matching by setting prices (in particular bid-ask spreads). If
an institution is more efficient than others in price discovery, it may achieve narrower spreads that
attract more customers and may gain higher profits. To be efficient a firm has to invest in technology
and the expected higher profits may justify the investment.
Informational economics paradigms dominate in both the intermediation and microstructure literature.
However, in both bodies of literature the fundamental assumption is that information is free and thus
information asymmetry is a market imperfection. As a special case, price, the most important
(aggregated) information in markets, is free.
But if information is totally free, firms’ incentives to invest in IT will disappear because of the free-riding
problem. So we argue that information asymmetry is not a market imperfection, but a competitive
advantage in production. As an example of information free riding, electronic crossing systems make
profit by being a parasite of real exchanges such as NYSE, that is, they use the prices on these
exchanges for free. As another example, on POSIT and Instinet, traders engage in off-market
negotiation, using market price as a reference. Economists have made comparisons between
negotiation and the market mechanism. However, the two mechanisms are not fully comparable in the
sense that the price discovery function of the market provides the negotiators with valuable
information. The information free-riding problem can be so serious as to undermine the market
mechanism. As more traders directly negotiate with each other and fewer use the market intermediary,
the prices in the market are less revealing and informative, driving the spreads higher and perhaps
leading to a collapse.
BIS Papers No 7 17
3. Competition issues for financial institutions in the internet era
When we view all financial institutions as intermediaries, or more generally as firms, the question of
which competition strategy to choose is central for each institution. Financial intermediaries and
markets are deploying e-finance to compete with each other fiercer than ever before.
Traditionally, financial institutions have different geographic locations and physical branch networks
that “naturally” differentiate them from each other. The competition between these firms can be
characterised by a Hotelling location model. However, the internet is changing the fundamental
business environment. As the internet is potentially accessible by everyone, a financial institution can
no longer dominate a local or regional market simply by its physical presence. Financial institutions
must find their particular competitive edge beyond sheer location and physical branches.
The internet and new information technologies have lowered the barrier of entering the finance
industry by reducing the initial investment and the transaction costs tremendously. Both incumbents
and new entrants find themselves offering essentially the same products and services and thus often
involve in Bertrand competition, or price wars, in order to gain bigger market share. For example, the
average brokerage commissions charged by top-10 online brokers dropped from $53 at the beginning
of 1996 to $16 in mid-1998, according to Credit Suisse First Boston (1998).
Because of the strong network externality in financial services, each firm is trying to enlarge its
customer base, many by mergers and acquisitions, either horizontally or vertically. Another trend in the
financial sector, which we think will prevail in the future, is differentiation in products and services.
In the following sections we discuss some competition issues in e-finance activities. Sato, Hawkins
and Berentsen (2001) present a conceptual structure for e-finance that consists of six levels: online
products, intermediaries, exchanges and trading systems, clearing and settlement systems, legal and
regulatory frameworks, and a communication platform. We discuss some of these activities with the
integrated analytical framework and the theme of competition strategies for financial institutions in the
internet age.
3.1 Bricks-and-mortar banks versus virtual banks
Most researchers and practitioners believe that disintermediation is unlikely to occur and financial
intermediation is still essential in the age of the internet; Sato, Hawkins and Berentsen (2001), Beck
(2001).
The most important pro-competition feature of the internet is the reduction of fixed costs and
transaction costs and this allows new competitors into the banking system. However, the two major
entry barriers for virtual banks are reputation (both as an agent for the lenders and as the monitor to
the borrowers), and large funds to pool risks. At first glance there is no way for an entrant to overcome
these barriers and be able to compete with those long-established and well-trusted traditional banks.
But researchers have noticed that large firms with a high reputation among customers and an existing
large customer base may be potential entrants. In fact, Sony just opened up an online banking branch,
which will focus on individual customers in a bid to attract one trillion yen ($9.3 billion) in deposits
within five years.
Besides established large firms, these entry barriers can also be overcome by large initial investment.
With large funding, virtual banks can gradually build up their customer base and reputation. Because
of the significant operating cost reduction, virtual banks can offer much more attractive rates to their
customers. Since most financial services offered by banks are standardised, it is not impossible that
virtual banks can build a customer base large enough to be viable. The equity of these banks will help
them provide liquidity to their customers.
We are not saying that pure-play virtual intermediaries are the future of the finance industry. While
such businesses may emerge and survive, the more successful strategies for financial institutions in
the internet age will depend on how they can find competitive edges over others in fully utilising the
existing systems and endless new opportunities the technologies have brought. Not only electronic
banks should differentiate themselves from brick-and-mortar banks, each bank should demonstrate
convincingly how its operations, products and services are creating value for customers that others
cannot provide.
18 BIS Papers No 7
3.2 Electronic stock markets: exchanges and trading systems
Securities markets used to be geographically segmented before the advent of the internet irrevocably
overhauled the landscape of the finance industry, including securities trading business. Theoretically,
the internet has made the notion of a single global securities market possible. In reality, however,
innovations in network technology have led to a boom in the business of developing electronic trading
systems; see Allen, Hawkins and Sato (this volume) and Fan et al (2001). Various types of electronic
trading systems, such as electronic communications networks (ECNs) and crossing networks, have
been developed, competing with well-established exchanges. In 2000, ECNs accounted for 30% of the
total share volume in Nasdaq stocks and around 3% of exchange-listed stocks, compared to the
figures of 13% and 1.4%, respectively, in 1993. On the other hand, existing markets around the world
are involved in the process of implementing electronic order books that consolidate orders submitted
by traders in that particular market.
In light of the integrated view of financial institutions, we consider such phenomena as fundamental
changes in the industrial organisation of the industry. Entry becomes profitable with the tremendous
decrease in the fixed and marginal costs of building a securities market. More importantly, financial
markets can no longer operate as local monopolies2
 because the internet has broken down the
geographic boundaries.
Next we discuss issues concerning competition between financial markets, especially those brought
up by the proliferation of electronic trading systems.
3.3 The impact of ECNs
One widely recognised fact is that due to the competition from ECNs, prices on exchanges such as
Nasdaq have become tighter, ie the bid-ask spreads have narrowed. ECNs have also affected market
operations by improving the flow of information through open order books. However, there is also a
serious concern that ECNs may exacerbate the market fragmentation and the inefficiency of multiple
trading systems. Though technologies are getting fancier, life for the traders is not made easier.
Actually, it is very costly to switch from one trading system to another due to the lack of
standardisation among different systems, which causes inefficiency.
ECNs such as Instinet have also blurred the distinction between brokers, market makers, and even
markets. For example, Instinet operates a trading desk that is the functional equivalent of a closed
order book. Although this often means routing orders to other systems, Instinet can attract more order
flow to the trading service. Instinet is a member of all US regional exchanges, the AMEX, the London,
Paris, Toronto, Zurich, Hong Kong, Frankfurt, Stockholm and Bermuda stock exchanges, the CBOE,
and the European Options Exchange, which gives its customers access to all the securities listed on
these exchanges. Instinet is also a part owner (9.9%) of a NYSE floor brokerage unit through its
ownership of Lynch Jones & Ryan, a private New York company that specialises in institutional trading
and research; Fan et al (2001).
The main reason for investors, especially institutional investors, to use ECNs is that they protect
“privacy” because of their anonymity and thus enable traders to transact large volumes without
affecting market prices significantly. This in effect conceals their identity to the market makers and
causes the information to be revealed more slowly.
3.4 Monopoly or oligopoly - competition view on market consolidation and fragmentation
As geographical constraints are becoming less a problem, the network externality effect makes market
consolidation an attractive choice for security exchanges in terms of liquidity. However in practice we
have not seen a wave of stock exchange mergers in recent years. Until now, there has been little
theoretical analysis of this “network puzzle” (Madhavan 2000). We suggest that instead of a normative
view on market consolidation/fragmentation, we should adopt a positive view in which markets are

2
 For financial markets, a “local market” can refer to larger geographic regions than in the case of other industries and
sometimes can even mean a national market.
BIS Papers No 7 19
treated as profit-making businesses competing with each other. Next we will discuss possible
explanations of the network puzzle with this approach.
One possible reason is that due to the limitations of technologies, the geographical factor is still
important and a local monopoly is still possible. Timely data transmission across a large geographical
region over the internet is still technically difficult giving the uncertain cyber-traffic. Moreover, as
discussed later, the high security requirements for financial data worsen this technical difficulty as
security and timely transmission are often at odds with each other.
Another possible reason is the lowered entry cost if we view stock exchanges as profit-making
businesses. While the advances in IT have made market consolidation - the extreme being a single
global securities market - possible, the technologies also make it financially attractive to establish
electronic exchanges, and as a result the markets are more fragmented.
A third possible reason is that markets may differentiate from each other by different trading
mechanisms that may fit different demands. Generally speaking, continuous markets can better serve
time-critical orders than call markets, albeit normally at a higher cost. As an example, Hendershott and
Mendelson (2000) show that less patient traders will go to dealer markets for instant execution, while
more patient traders will first try crossing networks for a possibly better price. Stock exchanges with
different mechanisms are differentiated from each other such that no competition can lead to
consolidation. Gode and Sunder (1999) discuss a specific technical problem in electronic markets: the
time lag problem for geographically distributed agents. They think that a call market instead of a
continuous market may solve this problem.
A fourth possible reason is the asymmetric information view. As shown in rational expectation
equilibrium theory, an informed trader cannot avoid sending information to the market if he wants to
reap information rent, thus alleviating the information asymmetry. This creates conflicts among
informed traders, as latecomers will suffer from the information leakage, and propels them to different
exchanges.
3.5 Electronic market with the provision of liquidity: electronic dealers?
In dealer markets, dealers provide liquidity to the market. Madhavan (2000) refers to a “dealers’
puzzle” - although a continuous market can be accomplished by automated systems without human
intervention, most markets still operate with market makers as intermediaries.
Considering the dealers as profit-making and competing intermediaries may help solve the puzzle and
further understand the value of liquidity provision. In the context of optimisation, Guo et al (2001) show
that providing liquidity may solve an optimisation problem that otherwise will not converge.
Currently, in automated trading systems, limit orders are matched automatically and there is no
liquidity provider. However, it is technologically feasible to implement an automated trading system in
which the system can provide liquidity. That is, the system may be the other side of a transaction and
thus carry inventory. As long as it is profitable to build in such functionality in the trading systems,
there is no reason that the companies operating the exchanges will not implement it in the future. To
implement such a system, another problem to be solved is the “trading rule” for this automated system
(the algorithm).
A theoretical breakthrough in understanding the dealers’ role in providing liquidity may lead to the
development of automated trading systems with an embedded “electronic dealer”. However, it is also
possible that such systems emerge in practice, introducing new challenges and opportunities for the
study of liquidity issues in finance theory.
3.6 Developments in the electronic bond market
The recent developments of electronic bond trading systems best demonstrate how IT may change
the landscape of markets and why markets should be viewed as profit-making businesses.
Traditionally, most of the dealers and brokers in the bond market executed trades by telephone and
fax. For example, the secondary market for U.S. treasury securities is largely an over-the-counter
market, but unlike Nasdaq, the highly automated OTC market for stocks, trading in the treasury market
is highly people-intensive; Fan et al (2001).
20 BIS Papers No 7
But major changes have taken place since the last decade. Electronic information dissemination
systems such as GovPx and FIPS (Fixed-Income Pricing System) were introduced in early 1990s.
Some companies, especially investment banks, have opened their single dealer system for bond
trading. For example, Credit Suisse First Boston’s GovTrade system started in 1992 and investors can
access quote information and trade bonds such as treasury securities, repos and commercial paper
through Bloomberg’s terminals. Other examples include Autobahn by Deutsche Bank, LMS by Merrill
Lynch, Fixed Income Securities. Recently, some electronic bond trading systems with multiple dealers
have been launched. The competition between multiple dealers usually leads to narrower bid-ask
spread and better prices for investors.
It is interesting that as the bond market progresses in adopting IT, rather than seeing a single, growing
electronic bond market, many companies are developing their own electronic bond exchanges and
these systems are competing with each other.
First, it is profitable for these companies to operate an electronic market. The advances in technology
have significantly reduced the fixed and marginal costs and make such a business profitable. And
without other restrictions, entry to the industry will continue until the profit equals the opportunity cost
and the equilibrium is reached.
Secondly, as competition gets keener, firms will seek to differentiate to maintain their profit level. Such
strategies are often backed up by investment in technology such that the firms can introduce new
products and services that others cannot or can only provide at higher costs. By offering different
services and expanding scopes of products, bond-trading systems enhance their competitive
advantages and gain higher market share and profits. For example, multiple-dealer bond trading
systems developed after the proliferation of single dealer systems. The competition among multipledealer systems is also highly intensive. TradeWeb started in the first quarter of 1998 and offers realtime trading for US securities. A similar system, Chicago Board of Brokerage’s MarketPower opened
in July 1998. Bloomberg BondTrader, a component of the Bloomberg Electronic Trading System
operational since March 1999, allows clients of participating dealers to execute orders and to make
price inquiries for US Treasury bills, notes and bonds on a regular, skip-day, corporate and whenissued basis. During the fourth quarter of 2000, BondTrader was expanded to include the buying and
selling of global non-dollar sovereign issues and US agencies on the same platform. State Street’s
Bond Connect, a complete fixed income electronic marketplace opened in June 2000 and significantly
augmented its system in January 2001 with features such as “Indication Of Interest” that can focus
market attention on particular securities and thereby release latent liquidity.
Innovations in trading mechanisms can also be deployed as competitive strategies. Fan et al (2000)
develop a theoretical model of an electronic continuous bond trading mechanism. The special feature
of this model is that it allows bundle matching in addition to single asset auction. In practice, one
example of innovation is that Bond Connect implements a call market in three sets of auction
sessions, with the first session of each set designed as the primary auction for aggregating liquidity,
and later sessions to allow adjustments.
3.7 E-finance-enabled design of financial organisations and mechanisms
The advances in IT have not only reduced transaction costs, but are also changing the way financial
products and services are provided. Innovation in organisation and mechanism may be the key for
financial institutions to provide value-added products and services and differentiate themselves.
In particular, developments in electronic commerce have enabled more customised services to
customers and “customisation” may be one of the most important competition strategies that financial
institutions will adopt in the foreseeable future. Saatcioglu et al (2001) introduce a new business
model, a “financial portal” that develops proprietary indices that focus on individual and small-business
customer needs, as well as corresponding financial instruments based on these indices, and a bundle
trading mechanism that helps establish and rebalance portfolios as needed. It provides customers with
customised investment services, while not requiring the knowledge and resources for investing in
individual securities, is more tailored to specific needs than mutual funds or index-tracking stocks, and
is much more affordable, and maybe more comfortable, than hiring financial consultants for investment
advice. Such a business model would not be feasible without the internet that can be accessed by
anyone from anywhere or the computing power that can support an automated bundle trading system;
Fan et al (1999).
BIS Papers No 7 21
Gu et al (2001) develop a new model for the OTC derivatives market. Based on Merton’s (1992)
theory on the replication of derivatives by a set of risky assets (other than the underlying asset) plus a
risk-free asset, financial intermediaries can transform option orders into common format replicating
portfolios, and match these orders in terms of replicating portfolios in a bundle-trading market. Thus by
hedging and rebalancing the risks in terms of the replicating portfolios instead of a specific derivative,
the aggregation and netting of portfolios, in particular the cancellations between orders on the same
assets, will result in significant reduction in transaction costs. In essence, financial intermediaries can
provide customised options at lower prices by developing replicating portfolios and an internal bundletrading system.
3.8 Electronic money
As with all new terms related to the internet, e-money refers to various items in different contexts. But
most people regard the two major forms of e-money as the smart or stored value card (SVC), and
network money or so-called cybermoney. A smartcard is a physical card with an embedded computer
chip or magnetic stripe that stores the owner’s value, while network money is stored in pure electronic
form as 0’s and 1’s in computers and can be transferred over telecommunication networks such as the
internet. Moreover, a hybrid of the two forms can be developed and users may further switch between
e-money and conventional deposits or even other payment media. A number of e-money schemes
have been developed but most are still in the fledgling stage.
Many researchers have studied the prospects of electronic money while others have examined the
policy implications. We think that the proliferation or failure of e-money depends not only on the
customer acceptance (though crucial), but also on the firms’ incentives to develop and promote this
new scheme.
Firstly, the issuer of e-money commits to provide specified quantities of goods at any future time,
which can be either instantaneous or far into the future. As a special type of debt, e-money can be
used as a source of financing, especially for operation. The influence of e-money on corporate finance
opens a new field both in theory and practice.
Second, companies may use the issuing of e-money as a competition strategy. The development of emoney involves strong network effects, just as in computer operating systems, telephone networks
and ATM cards, which means that the more people are using it, the better off are all the current users
in the network. As it gains popularity, e-money will become more liquid, transferable, convenient and
less risky. With the growth in e-commerce, we project that e-money issued by one or more companies
may gain higher acceptance than others and circulate well in the cyberspace. By issuing and
promoting its own e-money, a company can gain market share, negotiation power over suppliers as
well as earn more profits.
4. The challenges of public networks for e-finance activities
It is not surprising that once the internet is utilised, financial institutions have to face its problems.
Communications over the internet are insecure and often congested. Next we will discuss the
challenges that financial institutions face in e-finance over the internet, including security, quality of
service and some aberrations in e-finance.
4.1 The heavily armed e-finance intermediaries
Financial intermediaries are among the most careful businesses in using the internet. One piece of
evidence is that there has been no publicised security break-in for e-financial services, compared with
dozens of reported accidents for online retailers. Technologically speaking, timely software patching
and a real-time censoring mechanism almost suffice to prevent any possible system break-ins.
Financial institutions are not hesitating to invest in these technological solutions, given the possible
disastrous results if such a security investment is not made.
Although direct system break-ins or information interception/manipulation are always possible, such a
possibility is fading away as e-business software is becoming more fault-tolerating and computer
security teams are becoming more experienced. Practically speaking, heavily armed e-financial
22 BIS Papers No 7
intermediaries can effectively prevent all attempts to tear down their security walls, except for
Distributed Denial-of-Service (DDoS) attacks.
4.2 The dangerous distributed denial-of-service attack
What if attackers do not try to break-in, but simply block the entrance so that consumers cannot visit
the e-finance provider? Attackers can circumvent security no matter how heavy is the protection by
using this method. This is exactly what happened to E*Trade in February 2000, and it was offline for
hours. The attacking technology used then is called the DDoS attack. Two years after its first
appearance in 1999, the internet community still has no effective way to deal with the DDoS attack.
They are dangerous to all e-businesses, but especially dangerous to e-financial institutions as they are
often more time-sensitive than other industries. Securities trading is a good example. A stock trader is
likely to be dissatisfied with an e-brokerage if she misses a good trading chance simply because she
cannot login to the e-brokerage’s website.
The lack of an economically sound pricing structure exposes the internet to DDoS attacks. As long as
flat monthly fees are the dominant form of pricing, meaning that the marginal cost of sending out traffic
is zero, organisations have little incentive to protect their traffic and so DDoS attacks cannot be
effectively prevented; (Geng and Whinston 2000). Unfortunately, such events are still likely to happen
in near future as it is repeatedly reported that more sophisticated DDoS attack tools are proliferating
on the internet, while at the same time there is no strong signal that the troublesome flat rate pricing
scheme will be modified.
4.3 Virtual private networks and service level agreements
In the business-to-business realm, more and more financial institutions are setting up Virtual Private
Networks3
 (VPNs) over the internet to cut costs for intra-organisational transactions. They may choose
VPNs over leased lines to connect remote offices and users to cut costs significantly. Instead of
investing in the infrastructure themselves, they can drastically reduce their capital and operational
costs by outsourcing their network services to service providers who offer a robust VPN service and
therefore can focus on their core business in financial services.
One of the critical technology components of a VPN is security and in no other industry is security
more prominent. The most important technologies for the security component of a VPN include access
control to ensure the security of network connections, encryption to protect the privacy of data and
authentication to verify the user’s identity as well as the integrity of the data.
Another component critical in implementing a VPN is traffic management to guarantee reliability,
quality of service and high-speed performance. The internet backbone is congested, and critical
business applications running on the internet have to be prioritised and reliably delivered.
Because of these technology challenges of VPN, it is crucial for financial institutions to negotiate
carefully the Service Level Agreement (SLA) with their VPN service provider. An SLA is a contract
between the service provider and receiver that defines the services and service levels and also
specifies the guarantees. In order to give the service provider the proper incentive to provide secure
and high quality VPN service, there has to be penalty for non-compliance and the penalty should be
decided according to the loss of the financial institutions in the case of failure (Lin and Whinston
2001).
4.4 Shill bidding
Developments in e-finance have brought up new challenges to financial intermediaries and markets.
Aberrations such as shill bidding may occur. Shill bidding was first recognised by online auction

3
 A VPN is a private data network that makes use of public networks, maintaining the security of a private network through
tunnelling protocols and security procedures such as access control and encryption. VPNs provide companies with the
same capabilities at much lower cost by taking advantage of the economies of scale and management facilities of large
public networks. Companies may use a private virtual network for both extranet and wide-area intranet.
BIS Papers No 7 23
houses (eg eBay) as the deliberate placing of bids to artificially raise the price of an item.4
 Similar
activities may also undermine financial markets that use auction or any variation of auction
mechanism.
For example, there are also frauds that resemble shill-bidding behaviour in the IPO market; Bloomberg
(2001). In the IPO market the company pays institutions for bidding up the prices to mislead the public
into believing the new stock is worth more than its true value.
Many financial markets are essentially common-value double-auction markets and as more
transactions are made over the public network, inadequacy in authentication and other security
measures may lead to illegal transactions. Wang et al (2001) study the shill bidding issues in the
context of online auctions and propose that auctioneers can properly design a fee structure to prevent
shill bidding. Financial markets may also design such mechanisms to deter illegal buying and selling of
securities by “shills” of the insiders.
4.5 Payment for order flow
Weinberg and Kruger (2000) have pointed out that exchanges now pay brokerage firms for funnelling
orders to the exchanges.5
 This illustrates that financial markets, now fiercely competing with each
other, are using any business strategy available. With the rapid growth in online brokerage firms and
trading platforms, financial markets, in trying to make profits, are paying for the order flow. Such
practices obviously will hurt the customers of the brokerage firms since their orders may be routed to
the best paying exchanges instead to those with best prices.
5. Conclusions
We think that both financial intermediaries and financial markets can be viewed as firms producing
financial products and services. With this new perspective, we can better understand the new
developments in the finance industry in the internet era. In particular, it helps to explain the
proliferation of electronic financial institutions such as virtual banks, automated trading systems and
electronic debt markets.
It also sheds light on the industrial organisational structure of the finance sector and the competitive
strategies of financial organisations. With the development of IT and the internet, financial institutions
have to find competitive edges beyond location and physical network. Differentiation of financial
products and services is crucial for business success and proprietary development of new services by
utilising IT will be the key.
The internet also presents challenges to financial institutions trying to fully utilise this public
infrastructure. Security and quality concerns should be well addressed and Service Level Agreements
can be a contracting tool for financial institutions to ensure proper performance from their service
providers while concentrating on the core business of finance services.

4
 To avoid the appearance of being involved in this activity, online auction sites often require that family members and
individuals living together, working together or sharing a computer, should not bid on each other's items.
http://pages.ebay.com/help/community/shillBidding.html
5
 They say “Knight Securities, one of Nasdaq’s largest market makers, spent $134 million through the third quarter paying
other firms to let it handle their orders. … the nation’s five options exchanges hoped to avoid the flow payment system, but
relented and embraced it. … The Chicago Board Options Exchange launched its own payment programme in July. The
Amex, Philadelphia and Pacific exchanges quickly followed, offering 40 cents to $1 per option contract. … (As Edward
Provost, CBOE’s business development chief, put it) “Standing on principles sounds good, but since regulators have not
prohibited a practice that was eroding our market share, it would have made a lousy business decision” to forgo paying for
orders.”
24 BIS Papers No 7
References
Allen, F and A Santomero (1998): “The theory of financial intermediation”, Journal of Banking and
Finance, vol 2, pp 1461-85.
Beck, H (2001): “Banking is essential, banks are not. The future of financial intermediation in the age
of the internet”, Netnomics, vol 3, pp 2-22.
Bloomberg (2001): “Three tech firms accused of IPO fraud”, http://news.cnet.com/news/0-1007-200-
5700881.html, 23 April.
Boyd, J and E Prescott (1986): “Financial intermediary coalitions”, Journal of Economic Theory, vol 38,
pp 211-32.
Campbell, T and W Kracaw (1980): “Information production, market signalling, and the theory of
financial intermediation”, Journal of Finance, vol 35, pp 863-82.
Credit Suisse First Boston (1998): Research Report, November.
Dewan, S and H Mendelson (1998): “Information technology and time-based competition in financial
markets”, Management Science, vol 44, no 5, May, pp 595-609.
Diamond, D and P Dybvig (1983): “Bank runs, deposit insurance and liquidity”, Journal of Political
Economy, vol 91, pp 401-19.
Diamond, D (1984): “Financial intermediation and delegated monitoring”, Review of Economic Studies,
vol 51, pp 393-414.
Easley, D and M O’Hara (1987): “Price, trade size, and information in securities markets”, Journal of
Financial Economics, vol 19, pp 69-90.
Fan, M, S Srinivansan, J Stallaert and A Whinston (2001): Electronic Commerce and the Revolution in
Financial Markets, Harcourt.
Fan, M, J Stallaert and A Whinston (1999): “A web-based financial trading system”, IEEE Computer,
April, pp 64-70.
Fan, M, J Stallaert, and A Whinston (2000): “Designing electronic market institutions for bond trading”,
in Melnick, E (Ed), Creating Value in Financial Services: Strategies, Operations, and Technologies,
Kluwer Academic Publishers, Boston.
Freixas, X and Rochet, J-C (1997): Microeconomics of Banking, MIT Press.
Gale, D and M Hellwig (1985): “Incentive-compatible debt contracts: The one-period problem”, Review
of Economic Studies, vol 52, pp 647-64.
Geng, X and A Whinston (2000): “Defeating distributed denial-of-service attacks”, IEEE IT
Professional, July-August pp 36-41.
Glosten, L and P Milgrom (1985): “Bid, ask, and transaction prices in a specialist market with
heterogeneously informed traders”, Journal of Financial Economics, vol 14, no 1, March, pp 71-100.
Gode, D and S Sunder (2001): “Designing electronic markets: on the impossibility of equitable
continuously-clearing mechanisms with geographically distributed agents”, working paper, Feb.
Gu, S, J Stallaert and A Whinston (2001): “Exchange market model for over-the-counter equity
derivatives trading”, working paper, June.
Guo, Z, G Koehler and A Whinston (2001): “ Market-based optimisation algorithms for distributed
systems”, working paper.
Gurley, J and E Shaw (1960): Money in a Theory of Finance, Brookings Institution, Washington, DC.
Hendershott, T and H Mendelson (2000): “Crossing networks and dealer markets: competition and
performance”, Journal of Finance, vol 55, no 5, October, pp 2071-2115.
Holden, C and A Subrahmanyam (1992): “Long-lived private information and imperfect competition”,
Journal of Finance, vol 47,pp 247-70.
Kyle, A (1985): “Continuous auctions and insider trading”, Econometrica, vol 53, pp 1315-35.
BIS Papers No 7 25
Leland, H and D Pyle (1977): “Informational asymmetries, financial structure and financial
intermediation”, Journal of Finance, vol 32, pp 371-87.
Lin, L and A Whinston (2001): “Service level agreement and hedging of risks for service providers”,
working paper, Centre for Research in Electronic Commerce, University of Texas at Austin.
Madhavan, A (2000): “Market microstructure: a survey”, Journal of Financial Markets, vol 3, pp 205-58.
Merton, R (1989): “On the application of the continuous-time theory of finance to financial
intermediation and insurance”, Geneva Papers on Risk and Insurance Theory, vol 14, pp 225-61.
——— (1992): Continuous-time Finance, Blackwell Publishers.
——— (1993): “Operation and regulation in financial intermediation: a functional perspective”, in:
P England (ed.), Operation and Regulation of Financial Markets, The Economic Council, Stockholm.
——— (1995): “A functional perspective of financial intermediation”, Financial Management, vol 24, no
2, Summer, pp 23-41.
Merton, R and Z Bodie (1993): “Deposit insurance reform, a functional approach”, in A Meltzer and C
Plosser, (eds), Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, vol 38, June.
——— (1995): “A framework for analysing the financial system”, in Crane et al, (eds) The Global
Financial System: A Functional Perspective, Harvard Business School Press, Boston.
O’Hara, M (1995): Market Microstructure Theory, Blackwell Publishers.
Roth, A (1990): Two-sided matching: a study in game-theoretic modeling and analysis, Cambridge
(England).
Saatcioglu, K, J Stallaert and A Whinston (2001): “Design of a financial portal”, Communications of the
ACM, vol 44, no 6, June.
Sato, S, J Hawkins and A Berentsen (2001): “E-finance: recent developments and policy implications”,
forthcoming in Tracking a Transformation: E-commerce and the Terms of Competition in Industries,
Brookings Institution.
Scholtens, B and D van Wensveen (2000): “A critique on the theory of financial intermediation”,
Journal of Banking and Finance, vol 24, pp1243-51.
Shiller, R (1993): Macro Markets: Creating Institutions for Managing Society’s Largest Economic
Risks, Clarendon Press.
Spulber, D (1999): Market Microstructure: Intermediaries and the Theory of the Firm, Cambridge
University Press.
Wang, W, Z Hidvegi and A Whinston (2001): “Shill bidding in English auctions”, working paper, April.
Weinberg, N and D Kruger (2000): “Death by a thousand trades”, Forbes, 11 December, pp 262-72. 