Title: Text Classification using Neural Networks – Machine Learnings
Author: gk_
----------------------------------------

Understanding how chatbots work is important. A fundamental piece of machinery inside a chat-bot is the text classifier. Let’s look at the inner workings of an artificial neural network (ANN) for text classification.
We’ll use 2 layers of neurons (1 hidden layer) and a “bag of words” approach to organizing our training data. Text classification comes in 3 flavors: pattern matching, algorithms, neural nets. While the algorithmic approach using Multinomial Naive Bayes is surprisingly effective, it suffers from 3 fundamental flaws:
As with its ‘Naive’ counterpart, this classifier isn’t attempting to understand the meaning of a sentence, it’s trying to classify it. In fact so called “AI chat-bots” do not understand language, but that’s another story.
Let’s examine our text classifier one section at a time. We will take the following steps:
The code is here, we’re using iPython notebook which is a super productive way of working on data science projects. The code syntax is Python.
We begin by importing our natural language toolkit. We need a way to reliably tokenize sentences into words and a way to stem words.
And our training data, 12 sentences belonging to 3 classes (‘intents’).
We can now organize our data structures for documents, classes and words.
Notice that each word is stemmed and lower-cased. Stemming helps the machine equate words like “have” and “having”. We don’t care about case.
Our training data is transformed into “bag of words” for each sentence.
The above step is a classic in text classification: each training sentence is reduced to an array of 0’s and 1’s against the array of unique words in the corpus.
is stemmed:
then transformed to input: a 1 for each word in the bag (the ? is ignored)
and output: the first class
Note that a sentence could be given multiple classes, or none.
Make sure the above makes sense and play with the code until you grok it.
Next we have our core functions for our 2-layer neural network.
If you are new to artificial neural networks, here is how they work.
We use numpy because we want our matrix multiplication to be fast.
We use a sigmoid function to normalize values and its derivative to measure the error rate. Iterating and adjusting until our error rate is acceptably low.
Also below we implement our bag-of-words function, transforming an input sentence into an array of 0’s and 1’s. This matches precisely with our transform for training data, always crucial to get this right.
And now we code our neural network training function to create synaptic weights. Don’t get too excited, this is mostly matrix multiplication — from middle-school math class.
We are now ready to build our neural network model, we will save this as a json structure to represent our synaptic weights.
You should experiment with different ‘alpha’ (gradient descent parameter) and see how it affects the error rate. This parameter helps our error adjustment find the lowest error rate:
synapse_0 += alpha * synapse_0_weight_update
We use 20 neurons in our hidden layer, you can adjust this easily. These parameters will vary depending on the dimensions and shape of your training data, tune them down to ~10^-3 as a reasonable error rate.
The synapse.json file contains all of our synaptic weights, this is our model.
This classify() function is all that’s needed for the classification once synapse weights have been calculated: ~15 lines of code.
The catch: if there’s a change to the training data our model will need to be re-calculated. For a very large dataset this could take a non-insignificant amount of time.
We can now generate the probability of a sentence belonging to one (or more) of our classes. This is super fast because it’s dot-product calculation in our previously defined think() function.
Experiment with other sentences and different probabilities, you can then add training data and improve/expand the model. Notice the solid predictions with scant training data.
Some sentences will produce multiple predictions (above a threshold). You will need to establish the right threshold level for your application. Not all text classification scenarios are the same: some predictive situations require more confidence than others.
The last classification shows some internal details:
Notice the bag-of-words (bow) for the sentence, 2 words matched our corpus. The neural-net also learns from the 0’s, the non-matching words.
A low-probability classification is easily shown by providing a sentence where ‘a’ (common word) is the only match, for example:
Here you have a fundamental piece of machinery for building a chat-bot, capable of handling a large # of classes (‘intents’) and suitable for classes with limited or extensive training data (‘patterns’). Adding one or more responses to an intent is trivial.
From a quick cheer to a standing ovation, clap to show how much you enjoyed this story.
Philosopher, Entrepreneur, Investor
Understand how machine learning and artificial intelligence will change your work & life.
